The last decade has brought important advances in the area of children’s
mental health, including a concerted focus on building a scientific base for understanding the mental health difficulties that our most vulnerable members of
society experience and examining the impact of services that potentially reduce
child mental health needs [1,2]. Serious concern remains, however, as to whether
the current child mental health service delivery system can identify and reach
youth in need of care. The US Surgeon General identified meeting the mental
health needs of youth by ensuring the receipt of appropriate and relevant mental
health care as a national priority [2,3].
These calls to attend to children’s mental health needs are not new. In the early
1980s, Knitzer [4,5] severely criticized the child mental health service delivery
system as failing to respond to youths in serious need of mental health care. Two
decades later, rates of child mental health difficulties remain at alarming levels,
with an estimated 17% to 26% of youths in need of mental health care across the
United States [6– 9]. Within low-income, urban communities, rates of child mental health care need have been found to be even higher, with as many as 40% of
youths evidencing signs of mental health difficulties [10].
Numerous recent reports and research studies highlight the fact that most
children with mental health difficulties do not receive any type of mental health
care [2,3,8,11,12]. For example, a report by the National Institute of Mental
Health [13] concluded that approximately 75% of children with mental health
needs do not have any contact with the child mental health service system. This
disparity between need and use of services was found to be highest for minority
youth [13,14]. Unfortunately, these rates are identical to those reported in the
1056-4993/04/$ – see front matter D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.chc.2004.04.001
This work is supported by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health (K02 MH01796 &
T32 M#14623).
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mary.mckay@mssm.edu (M.M. McKay).
Child Adolesc Psychiatric Clin N Am
13 (2004) 905 – 921
mid-1980s by the Office of Technology Assessment [15], which indicates that the
level of need for services remains unchanged despite advances in developing
evidence-based assessments, treatments, and services for these children. There is
a significant need to understand and enhance the ability of the child mental health
care system to reach out effectively to youth and their families and engage them
in acceptable and effective child mental health care.
Addressing the mental health needs of minority youth who live in urban areas
has emerged as a most critical issue given the substantial evidence that these youth
are most deeply affected by the stressors that exist within inner-city communities,
notably poverty, community violence, inadequate child serving resources, undersupported schools, substance abuse, and multiple health epidemics [16 – 20]. This
article pays specific attention to issues related to engaging urban youth of color
and their families in services and provides an overview of the larger body of
research on engagement of youth and their families in mental health care.
Defining child mental health service engagement
Multiple conceptualizations of the process of engagement of youth and
families in mental health care have been offered and tested. For example, in a
series of articles, engagement has been defined as a process that begins with a
child being identified as experiencing mental health difficulties and ending with
a child receiving mental health care [21 – 23]. More specifically, engagement in
care is described as beginning with the recognition of a child mental health problem by parents, teachers, or other adults within a child’s context. Next, there is a
process of addressing the unmet need by connecting a youth and the family with
a mental health resource, generally via a referral for care. The final phase of engagement consists of a child being brought to a child mental health center or
being seen by a school-based mental health care provider.
Within the literature, engagement in child mental health services also has been
divided into two specific steps: initial attendance and ongoing engagement [24].
Each step is considered related to the other, but each one also emerges as a
distinct construct being independently related to characteristics of the child, the
family, and the service system. Rates of service engagement also differ at each of
the two steps and warrant specific consideration. For example, studies that focused on attendance at initial appointments for care within an urban child mental
health care center found that rates of failure to attend an initial intake appointment
can range from 62% [25] to 48% [26] of youth accepted for an evaluation. In
relation to ongoing urban service engagement, estimates of average length of care
can be as low as four sessions [27] or rates of as few as 9% of youth and their
families remaining in care after a 3-month period.
Researchers have suggested that a more precise definition of service engagement may contribute to more reliable research findings and generalizability.
Kadzin et al [28 –30] noted that grouping children and families who discontinue
services into one category (ie, dropouts) may contribute to inconsistent and biased
906 M.M. McKay, W.M. Bannon, Jr / Child Adolesc Psychiatric Clin N Am 13 (2004) 905–921
findings. The authors noted distinct phases of ongoing engagement and observed
that children who exit treatment do so at diverse points, such as while waiting for
treatment, after one or two treatment sessions, or later in treatment. It was
hypothesized in a study conducted by this team involving youth with disruptive
behavioral difficulties at the Yale Child Study Center that the characteristics of
children and families who drop out of services vary in relation to the point in time
at which they exited services [29]. Subsequent findings supported this hypothesis.
More specifically, the study sample was divided into three groups: early dropouts (attended 6 weeks of treatment), late dropouts (attended 7– 14 weeks of
treatment), and individuals who completed therapy (approximately 7– 8 months).
Children and families who dropped out early in the treatment process averaged
3.8 sessions, whereas later dropouts averaged 10.8 sessions of treatment. Analyses
indicated that child, parent, and family characteristics differed significantly between the overall group of families who terminated treatment prematurely and
completed treatment. Most of the domains and measures that predicted early termination from treatment in analyses did not predict late termination from treatment,
however. In comparison to completers, families that dropped out of treatment early
were significantly more likely to belong to a minority group, have greater stress,
and be headed by a single parent. Children in families that dropped out early
were characterized by more severe child impairment in relation to conduct disorder
and delinquency, academic functioning, and social behavior problems. When comparing late terminators versus completers, late terminators differed by nonbiologic
head of household, child antisocial history, and poor adaptive functioning at school.
A direct comparison between early and late terminators revealed that the two
groups differed significantly by minority status, family income, poor living accommodations, adverse family child-rearing practices, child contact with antisocial peers, and poor adaptive functioning at school. The authors noted that the
literature is often at odds, reporting inconsistent findings of which families drop
out of treatment prematurely. This study identified that a reason for these conflicting findings may be that combining all dropouts into a single group is potentially misleading and can obscure our understanding of the process of families
prematurely exiting services. A more precise definition and conceptualization of
different categories of dropouts may be needed by the child attrition literature.
These findings also potentially can guide specific engagement interventions by
helping to identify and target risk factors associated with families that drop out at
different points of the treatment process.